 Android is a complete set of software for mobile devices such as tablet computers, notebooks, smartphones, electronic book readers, set-top boxes etc.

It contains a linux-based Operating System, middleware and key mobile applications.

It can be thought of as a mobile operating system

In android runtime, there are core libraries and DVM (Dalvik Virtual Machine) which is responsible to run android application. DVM is like JVM but it is optimized for mobile devices. It consumes less memory and provides fast performance.

The core building blocks or fundamental components of android are activities, views, intents, services, content providers, fragments and AndroidManifest.xml.

Activity

An activity is a class that represents a single screen. It is like a Frame in AWT.
View

A view is the UI element such as button, label, text field etc. Anything that you see is a view.
Intent

Intent is used to invoke components. It is mainly used to:

    Start the service
    Launch an activity
    Display a web page
    Display a list of contacts
    Broadcast a message
    Dial a phone call etc.

Android Intent is the message that is passed between components such as activities, content providers, broadcast receivers, services etc.

Service is a background process that can run for a long time.

There are two types of services local and remote. Local service is accessed from within the application whereas remote service is accessed remotely from other applications running on the same device.
Content Provider

Content Providers are used to share data between the applications.

Fragment
Fragments are like parts of activity. An activity can display one or more fragments on the screen at the same time.
Android Fragment is the part of activity, it is also known as sub-activity. There can be more than one fragment in an activity. Fragments represent multiple screen inside one activity.

AndroidManifest.xml

It contains informations about activities, content providers, permissions etc. It is like the web.xml file in Java EE.

Generated R.java file
It is the auto-generated file that contains IDs for all the resources of res directory. It is generated by aapt(Android Asset Packaging Tool).


